In 1963 the first numerical model of ocean circulation was developed by Bryan et
al.  \cite{Bryan1963}. Since the work developed by Bryan there have been many
numerical studies of ocean circulation, however the majority of which have
relied on the Finite Difference Method (FDM). For a more detailed review see
Griffies et al. \cite{Griffies2000}. However, some \emph{Finite Element} (FE)
ocean models do exist, see for example, \cite{Fix} and \cite{Myers}. In addition
to the the Fix and Myers FE models one can find: the QUODDY model by Ip et. al.
\cite{Ip1995}, a 3D shallow water equations model based on linear triangular
elements; the DGCOM model by Giraldo et al. \cite{GiraldoWWW}, a 2D shallow
water equation model based on the discontinuous Galerkin approach.

The Finite Element Method (FEM) offers some distinct advantages over the FDM:
the FEM allows for the easy representation of coastlines; and the FDM suffers
from an inherent rigidness of structured grids making refinement in specific
regions difficult. On the other hand the FEM allows for the use of unstructured
grids, which allows for grid refinement in areas for which dynamics of the
system have been deemed important, such as narrow straits, islands, areas
containing western boundary currents, or meso-scale eddies.

However, it is well known that certain FE pairs allow for the existence of
spurious computational modes. A similar issue exists for the FDM, and thus the
choice of an appropriate Arakawa grid is usually discussed when developing a
FDM. Such grids aren't generally considered in the FE community, however, Hanert
\cite{Hanert2004} has shown that a similar consideration can be taken into
account. The more common approach is to use a FE which is of differing order,
such as Taylor-Hood FE pairs. For instance, it is well known that an equal order
FE pair implementation of the Navier-Stokes equations results in spurious
pressure modes, but a use of Taylor-Hood FE pairs does not. The explanation of
this comes from the cellebration LBB condition \cite{Johnson2009}
\textcolor{red}{Cite more authors here}. For the rotating Shallow Water
Equations we see a similar issue where a standard equal order FE results in
spurious height modes, while Taylor-Hood elements do not \cite{Hanert2004}
\textcolor{red}{Cite more authors here}.

In this paper we present a least squares stabilization of a piecewise linear
equal order FE pair applied to the SWE, based on the G2 (or General Galerkin)
method, using the finite element cG(1)cG(1). This method uses piecewise linears
in space and piecewise constants in time, and will be discussed in more detail
in a later section. The addition of stabilizing terms prevent the well known
spurious elevation modes associated with equal order FE discretizations of
the SWE (see \cite{Hanert2002,Hanert2006,Le-Roux2005}).

The outline of this paper is as follows: first we recall the rotating shallow
water equations for the ocean, we then discuss the basics of the G2 finite
element. We conclude the paper by demonstrating the code on some test cases.
